Zarr v3 design update
---------------------

Alistair Miles ([@alimanfoo](https://github.com/alimanfoo))

19 June 2019

====

### Current status

* Development is ongoing via the core-protocol-v3.0-dev branch in the
  [zarr-specs repo](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs),
  follow
  [PR#16](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/16) for
  current status.

* Rendered docs from this branch can be [viewed on
  RTFD](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/).

* This is still a straw man, everything is up for discussion.

====

### Design principles

1. Hackable
2. Parallel
3. Distributed

===

### Design principles - hackable

* Easy to implement
* Easy to extend with new functionality
* Easy to inspect and manipulate data with generic tools

===

### Design principles - parallel

* Think "what happens if two workers do X at the same time"?
* Avoid race conditions

===

### Design principles - distributed

* Accommodate eventual consistency

====

### Modular spec architecture

* [Core protocol spec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html)
* [Protocol extension specs](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/extensions.html)
* Codec specs
* Storage specs

===

### [Core protocol spec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html)

* Minimal, easy as possible to do full implementation in any language.
 
* Aiming for intersection of N5 and Zarr v2 features.

* Defines a variety of **extension points** so can also serve as a
  foundation for growth and experimentation.

===

### Protocol extension specs

* Each protocol extension gets its own spec.

* Currently the core-protocol-v3.0-dev branch also includes some
  protocol extension specs, to illustrate the concept.
  
  * E.g., [Datetime data types
    spec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/extensions/datetime-dtypes/v1.0.html)

* Ultimately these extension specs should get split out each into a
  separate development branch, so we decouple them from the core
  protocol spec.
  
* N.B., protocol extensions could also **modify** the core protocol
  (more on that later).

===

### Codec specs

* Each codec intended for use as a compressor or filter gets it's own
  spec.
  
* @@TODO create an example to illustrate the concept.

===

### Storage specs

* Each concrete storage system (e.g., file system, cloud object
  storage, Zip file, LMDB, ...) gets it's own spec.

* @@TODO create an example to illustrate the concept.

====

### Spec development process - current

* Currently @alimanfoo is acting as editor for the v3.0 core protocol
  spec.

  * Feedback/comments/ideas welcome from anyone at any time
    ([PR#16](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/16) is
    probably the best place for comments).
	
  * Still in a conceptualisation phase, no need for formal decision
    process as yet.

===

### Spec development process - future?

* Ultimately I think we'll need to define a community process for spec
  development, so that:
  
  * It's clear how others can contribute.
  
  * It's clear how decisions get made.
  
  * It's clear what stage of maturity each spec is at.
  
* Don't have a solution for that yet, may need advice/help on best
  approach.

===

### Spec development process - freedoms

* Hopefully the [zarr-specs
  repo](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs) can serve as a
  focus for community spec development.
  
  * ...and the [zarr-specs RTFD
    site](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io) can serve as a discovery
    point for specs.
  
* However, don't want to force all spec development down the same
  route, or force all specs to be published in the same place.
  
  * This is one reason why currently the core protocol spec makes use
    of **URIs** in metadata to refer to protocol extensions and
    codecs - allow freedom for anyone to publish their own spec.

====

### [Core protocol - concepts and terminology](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#concepts-and-terminology)

*Hierachy. Group. Array. Name. Path. Dimension. Shape. Element. Data
type. Chunk. Grid. Memory layout. Compressor. Codec. Metadata
document. Store.*

* Are we comfortable with this terminology and how it is defined?

* Any important missing terms/concepts?

====

### [Core protocol - node names](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#node-names)

* Each node (array or group) in a hierarchy has a name.

* Node names are used to form node paths.

  * E.g., "/foo/bar" is a path identifying a node named "bar" whose
    parent is named "foo" whose parent is the root node.

===

### Node names - restrictions

* Node paths are used by users to access nodes and explore/navigate a
  hierarchy.

* N.B., node paths are also used to form storage keys (see later).

* To try and ensure compatibility with a variety of storage systems,
  the core protocol currently states fairly heavy
  [restrictions](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#node-names)
  on node names.
  
  * Includes restriction to ASCII alpha-numeric characters, "-", "_"
    and ".".

===

### Node names - restrictions

* Are we comfortable with the current restrictions? 

* Should we be aiming to support Unicode? Or is that a bridge too far
  for now?

  * Not sure what full implications would be, but supporting Unicode
    could make storage specs and implementations harder to develop.

===

### Node names - case (in)sensitivity

* N.B., some file systems are case sensitive, some are not.

* This can ([and
  has](https://github.com/cggh/scikit-allel/issues/215#issuecomment-434088283))
  led to bugs with the zarr v2 protocol when used with file system
  storage on different operating systems.
  
* Hard to resolve without annoying users (e.g., force all names to
  lower case) or complicating implementation (e.g., check for
  case-insensitive name clashes).
  
* I'm not happy with the spec's current approach to this.

====

### Core protocol - arrays

* Arrays have dimensions, shape and data type.

* Shape (length of dimensions) is finite.

  * But protocol extension could modify this to define behaviour for
    "[open-ended](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr/issues/323)"
    (i.e., infinite) dimensions.

====

### [Core protocol - data types](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#id5)

* Boolean (single byte)

* Integer (signed or unsigned; 1, 2, 4, 8 bytes; little- or
  big-endian)

* Float (2, 4, 8 bytes; little- or big-endian)

* Any other data type can be defined via a protocol extension

  * E.g., [datetime data
    types](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/extensions/datetime-dtypes/v1.0.html)

===

### Data types - identifiers

* Each data type needs an identifier for use in metadata documents.

* E.g., "bool", "i1", "<i4", ">u8", "<f2", etc.

===

### Extension data types - fallback

* Any extension data type can define a **fallback** which is a core
  data type with the same item size.
  
* Allow for graceful degradation of functionality.

* Should this be called "fallback"? Maybe "base type"?

====

### Core protocol - chunk grids

* A chunk grid defines a set of chunks which contain the elements of an array.

* The chunks of a grid form a tessellation of the array space, which
  is a space defined by the dimensionality and shape of the array.

  * => Every element of the array is a member of one chunk, and there
    are no gaps or overlaps between chunks.

===

### Grid types

* In general there are several different possible types of grid.

* The core protocol defines [regular
  grids](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#regular-grids).
  
* Other grid types could be defined via protocol extensions, e.g.,
  [non-uniform (rectilinear)
  grid](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr/issues/245).

* Any grid type must define:

  * How the array space is divided into chunks.
  
  * A unique identifier for each chunk in the grid (used to form
    storage keys, see later).

===

### [Regular grids](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#regular-grids)

* Grid type where each chunk is a (hyper)rectangle of the same shape.

* I.e., grid type used in HDF5 and Zarr v2.

* Each chunk has a grid index, which is a tuple of grid coordinates.

  * E.g., grid index (0, 3, 7) means first chunk along first
    dimension, fourth chunk along second dimension, 8th chunk along
    third dimension.

===

### Regular grids - chunk identifiers

* Chunk identifier is formed from grid index.

  * E.g., chunk at grid index (0, 3, 7) has identifier "0.3.7".
  
* Default separator is "." but can be changed (e.g., to "/" as in N5)
  in array metadata (see later).

===

### Regular grids - edge chunks

* All chunks have the same shape.

* If the length of any array dimension is not perfectly divisible by
  the chunk length along the same dimension, the grid will overhang
  the edge of the array space.
  
* Spec currently doesn't say any more about how to handle edge chunks,
  maybe it should?

  * E.g., suggest using array fill value to fill contents of edge
    chunks beyond the array space.
	
* Other approaches (e.g., truncated edge chunks) could be defined as a
  different grid type via a protocol extension.

===

### Regular grids - resizing arrays

* Regular grid supports growing and shrinking an array along any
  dimension.

  * Growing only requires change to array metadata (update array
    shape), no chunk data needs to be added or modified.
	
  * Shrinking requires change to array metadata (update array shape)
    plus delete any chunks now completely outside the array space.
	
* Regular grid does not support [growing an array in "negative"
  direction](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/9),
  i.e., prepending.
  
  * But could define a grid type that does support this via a protocol
    extension.

====

### Core protocol - chunks

* What is a chunk? Logically, it's an N-dimensional typed array,
  containing data elements from a region of a Zarr array.

* Chunk shape, data type and memory layout are all defined in the
  metadata for the Zarr array in which the chunk belongs.
  
  * I.e., chunks don't need their own metadata (at least when using a
    regular grid).
  
* When reading/writing chunks, expect implementations will use some
  appropriate class for managing typed memory blocks.
  
  * E.g., in Python could use
    [NumPy](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.ndarray.html),
    [XND](https://xnd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/xnd/index.html) or
    [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#arrays)
    (for 1D chunks).
	
  * E.g., in C++ could use
    [xtensor](https://xtensor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/container.html#arrays-and-tensors).

===

### [Chunks - memory layouts](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#id6)

* Memory layout (along with data type) defines binary representation
  for a chunk.

* Core protocol defines two memory layouts for chunks.

  * C contiguous (row-major).
  * F contiguous (column-major).
  
* Protocol extensions could define other memory layouts.

===

### [Chunks - encoding](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#chunk-encoding)

* Optionally, an array can be configured with a compressor.

* A compressor is a codec which can be used to encode and decode
  chunks during storage and retrieval.
  
* Support for filters (sequence of zero or more codecs applied prior
  to compressor during encoding) has been moved following
  [discussion](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/38)
  to a [protocol
  extension](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/extensions/filters/v1.0.html).

* N.B., codecs may be lossy, i.e., decode(encode(x)) round trip
  doesn't have to be perfect, but must preserve memory layout and data
  type.

===

### Codecs

* Currently, the core protocol spec defines a codec as a pair of
  algorithms (encode and decode) which each operate on a sequence of
  bytes.
  
* This should probably be modified so that [codecs operate on typed
  memory
  blocks](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/38#issuecomment-500858540),
  i.e., have access to information about data type, item size, chunk
  shape.

===

### How to define a codec?

* Define the encode and decode algorithms (or cite some existing
  documents that define them).
  
* Define any configuration parameters (e.g., compression level).

* State the codec identifier, which must be a URI that dereferences to
  the codec spec.
  
  * The codec identifier is used in array metadata, see later.

* @@TODO example codec spec

====

### [Core protocol - metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#metadata)

* Each Zarr hierarchy is defined via metadata documents.

   * One [bootstrap
     metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#bootstrap-metadata)
     document.
   * Multiple [array
     metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#array-metadata)
     documents.
   * Multiple [group
     metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#group-metadata)
     documents.
   
* Metadata documents are defined using the JSON type system (objects,
  arrays, strings, numbers).
  
* Metadata documents are encoded for storage.

  * Default encoding is JSON, but protocol extensions can define other
    encodings for group and array metadata, see below.

===

### [Array metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#array-metadata) - example

```json
{
    "shape": [10000, 1000],
    "data_type": "<f8",
    "chunk_grid": {
        "type": "regular",
        "chunk_shape": [1000, 100]
    },
    "chunk_memory_layout": "C",
    "compressor": {
        "codec": "http://purl.org/zarr/spec/codec/gzip",
        "configuration": {
            "level": 1
        }
    },
    "fill_value": "NaN",
    "extensions": [],
    "attributes": {
        "foo": 42,
        "bar": "apples",
        "baz": [1, 2, 3, 4]
    }
}
```

===

### Array metadata - example using extension data type

```json
{
    ...
    "data_type": {
        "extension": "http://purl.org/zarr/spec/protocol/extensions/datetime-dtypes/1.0",
        "type": "<M8[ns]",
        "fallback": "<i8"
    },
	...
}
```

===

### Array metadata - attributes

* N.B., user attributes are contained within the array metadata
  document.

* No constraint on content, up to user/application.

===

### Array metadata - attributes

Could be a flat set of name/value pairs, e.g.:

```json
{
    ...
    "attributes": {
        "foo": 42,
        "bar": "apples",
        "baz": [1, 2, 3, 4]
    }
}
```

===

### Array metadata - attributes

Could be deeply nested structure, e.g.:

```json
{
    ...
    "attributes": {
        "@id" : "arc:arc0",
        "@type" : [ "ome:Arc", "ome:ManufacturerSpec" ],
        "identifier" : "LightSource:1",
        "ome:arcType" : {
            "@id" : "arcType:Xe"
        },
		...
    }
}
```

<small>(This example probably needs to be fixed to properly use
JSON-LD, but hopefully the concept is clear.)</small>

===

### [Group metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#group-metadata) - example

Currently nothing but extensions and attributes:

```json
{
    "extensions": [],
    "attributes": {
        "spam": "ham",
        "eggs": 42,
    }
}
```

===

### [Bootstrap metadata](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/protocol/core/v3.0.html#bootstrap-metadata)

Bootstrap metadata is a new concept, not present in either Zarr v2 or
N5. Why add it?

* Provides metadata about metadata, e.g., what core protocol version
  is being used, what metadata encoding is being used.

* Allows for extensions to be declared that modify metadata and/or
  data layout or encoding or other protocol changes that apply
  globally to the entire hierarchy.
  
  * E.g., a protocol extension for [consolidated
    metadata](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial.html#consolidating-metadata)
    could declare itself here, allowing an implementation to discover
    that consolidated metadata is available.
	
  * E.g., a protocol extension that uses [something other than
    JSON](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/37#issuecomment-499954809)
    for metadata encoding could declare itself here.

===

### Bootstrap metadata (2)

* Allows hierarchies to be self-describing (i.e., don't need
  out-of-band information to interpret).

* Allows implementations to provide appropriate error messages when
  unsupported protocol extensions/modifications are being used.

===

### Bootstrap metadata - example

```json
{
    "zarr_format": "http://purl.org/zarr/spec/protocol/core/3.0",
    "metadata_encoding": "application/json",
    "extensions": [
        {
            "extension": "http://example.org/zarr/extension/foo",
            "must_understand": false,
            "configuration": {
                "foo": "bar"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

====

### Core protocol - stores

@@TODO store interface

====

### Core protocol - storage protocol

@@TODO storage keys; protocol operations; group and array creation;
implicit groups
